An analysis of test data of 180 high school students from Northern California was performed to determine whether there is a significant indirect effect of reading score on the relationship of math score to science knowledge, while controlling for writing ability score and social studies score, and how the effect of math score on science knowledge changes with the mediator of reading score.

An initial multiple regression model, which encompassed the variable of interest: math score, the mediator: reading score, the nuisance variables: writing ability, social studies score, and the dependent variable: science knowledge, was run to discover any potential violations in the data with respect to our assumptions (linearity, homoscedasticity, no outliers, no significant colinearity outside of interaction). From this model, homoscedastic behavior in the data and the absence of unexpected colinearity were confirmed. In addition, 2 outliers were found and deleted as they reported a Cook’s distance well above the cutoff (4 / (n - k - 1)).

Once it was confirmed that the basic data assumptions were met, and outliers were removed, a new model was run without the mediator to observe the total effect of math score on science knowledge. This model presented an F-statistic of F(3, 174) = 58.83, p < 0.05 and indicated indicated there exists a significant relationship between math score and science knowledge with a t-statistic of t(174) = 6.03, p < 0.05 and R^2 = 50.4%. The total effect (path c) was found to be c = 0.4534.

Next, a third and fourth models were run to calculate the indirect effect, or mediator effect, of reading score on science knowledge as well as the direct effect of math score on science knowledge. The third model (F(3,174)=89.56, p < 0.05) was used to find the relationship between math score and reading score (or path a), this relationship was calculated to be a = 0.4694 with a t-statistic of t(174) = 6.614, p < 0.05. The fourth model (F(3,174)=49.44, p < 0.05, R^2 = 53.3%) included both the variable of interest and the mediator variable and it gave insight on the relationship between reading score and science knowledge (or path b) and the direct effect between math score and science knowledge. Path b was found to be b = 0.2596, t(174) = 3.324, p < 0.05 and the direct effect was 0.33154, t(174) = 4.054, p < 0.05. Path a and b were then multiplied to find the indirect effect a*b = 0.1219. It was then verified that total effect = indirect effect + direct effect.

Finally, the significance of the indirect effect was calculated via the Sobel Test and the Bootstrapping procedure, with both methods resulting in the indirect effect being significant. The Sobel Test returned a significant z-score of z=0.1218, p < 0.05, while the Bootstrapping procedure of 20000 samples, determined the 95% confidence interval of the indirect effect to be between 0.0443 and 0.2117, also indicating significance. These Bootstrapped values were confirmed using an Asymptotic Distribution for product values (MacKinnon, 2005), which also showed 95% confidence limits that did not capture a zero value.
