An analysis of data representing 3128 respondents from the General Social Survey (GSS) in which subjects were asked various questions related to their current life status, including age, education level, income, marital status, and health, was performed. The research question was: Does the underlying regression model predicting yearly salary from years of education change as education level increases? Particularly, is there a change in the relationship of education to salary after 12 years of education (after completing high school).

Given that this is a segmented regression problem, the data was first coded to represent the two groups to be analyzed. Next, an initial regression model was run to discover any potential violations in the data with our assumptions (linearity, homoscedasticity, no outliers). The model reported an F-statistic of F(3,3214) = 83.71, p < 0.05, and an R^2 of 7.24%. From this model, homoscedastic behavior in the data and the absence of unexpected colinearity were confirmed. In addition, 10 outliers were found and deleted as they reported a Cook’s distance of greater that 0.02. The first model gave an indication that there exists a significant relationship between years of education and yearly salary for the group with an education level above 12th grade, with a t-statistic of t(3214) = 4.951, p < 0.05.

Once it was confirmed that the basic data assumptions were met, and outliers were removed, the model was re-run to observe an increase in the F-statistic (F(3,3204) = 134.5, p < 0.05) and R^2 = 11.2%.  Analysis showed a significant "jump" in yearly salary above an education level of 12 years, b = 3798.16, t(3204) = 2.205, p < 0.05. Analysis also showed that above 12 years salary increases by b = 3145.35, t(3204) = 17.357, p = <0.05, for every year of education one attains. In contrast, below 12 years of education, there was a non-significant relationship between education level and yearly salary with b = -98.48, t(3204) = -0.204, p > 0.05. Finally, the difference in salary slopes between groups of b = 3243.82 was found to be significant t(3204) = 6.297, p < 0.05
