An analysis of data representing 270 elementary aged children from a north Texas public school was performed to determine the magnitude of "problem behavior" stemming from Depressive Symptoms, while controlling for age, gender, School Connectedness, and Family Connectedness. The research question was: is the relationship between Depressive Symptoms and Problem Behavior moderated by School Connectedness?

An initial multiple regression model, which included an interaction between Depressive Symptoms and School Connectedness, was run to discover any potential violations in the data with our assumptions (linearity, homoscedasticity, no outliers, no significant colinearity outside of interaction). The model reported an F-statistic of F(6,263) = 20.13, p < 0.05, and an R^2 of 31.5%. From this model, homoscedastic behavior in the data and the absence of unexpected colinearity were confirmed. In addition, 2 outliers were found and deleted as they reported a Cook’s distance of three times the cutoff (3 * 4 / (n - k - 1)). The first model also indicated there exists a significant relationship between Depressive Symptoms and Problem Behavior with a t-statistic of t(263) = 3.72, p < 0.05.

Once it was confirmed that the basic data assumptions were met, and outliers were removed, the model was re-run to observe an increase in the F-statistic (F(6,261) = 21.51, p < 0.05) and R^2 = 33.1%. We confirm again there indeed exists a significant interaction between Depressive Symptoms and School Connectedness, b=-0.088 t(261) = -2.49, p < 0.05. Evaluation of simple slopes at the mean, 1SD below the mean and 1SD above the mean of School Connectedness (per the Pick-a-Point approach recommended by Aiken & West (1991)) showed two out of the three slopes to be significant. At 1SD below mean: b = 0.456, t(261) = 4.884, p < 0.05, at the mean: b = 0.306, t(261) = 3.916, p < 0.05, and finally, at 1SD above the mean: b = 0.155, t(261) = 1.500, p > 0.05.

Finally, Using the Johnson-Neyman technique (Bauer & Curran, 2005), the Regions of Significance for the impact of Depressive Symptoms on Problem Behavior were determined to be at School Connectedness values of 5.69 and 22.20. Above School Connectedness values of 5.69, the impact of Depressive Symptoms on Problem Behavior becomes non-significant.
