An analysis of data representing 311 medical school students in the Basic Sciences and Clinical Sciences programs was performed to determine whether the Student Group a student is enrolled in (Basic or Clinical Sciences) moderate the relationship between Quality of Life: Psychological Assessment (QOLPSY) and State Anxiety, after controlling for Age and the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI).

After factoring the Student Group variable (with Basic Sciences as reference), an initial multiple regression model, which included an interaction between Student Group and QOLPSY, was run to discover any potential violations in the data with our assumptions (linearity, homoscedasticity, no outliers, no significant colinearity outside of interaction). The model reported an F-statistic of F(5,300) = 20.14, p < 0.05, and an R^2 of 25.1%. From this model, homoscedastic behavior in the data and the absence of unexpected colinearity were confirmed. In addition, 5 outliers were found and deleted as they reported a Cook’s distance of three times the cutoff (3 * 4 / (n - k - 1)). The first model also indicated there exists a significant relationship between QOLPSY and Student group with a t-statistic of t(300) = 6.09, p < 0.05.

Once it was confirmed that the basic data assumptions were met, and outliers were removed, the model was re-run (again with Basic Sciences as reference) to observe an increase in the F-statistic (F(5,295) = 24.29, p < 0.05) and R^2 = 29.16%. We confirm again there indeed exists a significant interaction between Student Group and Social Support, t(295) = 5.15, p < 0.05. Evaluation of simple slopes showed a significant impact of QOLPSY on State Anxiety for Basic Sciences (b = -0.451, t(295) =-7.670, p < 0.05). However, there was no significant impact of QOLPSY on State Anxiety for Clinical Sciences (b = -0.067, t(295) = -0.994, p > 0.05).

Finally, the impact of QOLPSY on State Anxiety between the Basic and Clinical Sciences groups was significantly different (t(295) = 5.149, p < 0.05). The lower and upper threshold of difference between two student groups (Basic and Clinical) with respect to QOLPSY being 40.99 and 58.14, respectively.
